Chapter 3: Needs Assessment
Authority: Section 330(k)(2) and Section 330(k)(3)(J) of the PHS Act; and 42 CFR 51c.104(b)(2-3), 42 CFR 51c.303(k), 42 CFR 56.104(b)(2), 42 CFR 56.104(b)(4), and 42 CFR 56.303(k)
Element b - Update of Needs Assessment
The health center completes or updates a needs assessment of the current or proposed population at least once every three years, 13 for the purposes of informing and improving the delivery of health center services. The needs assessment utilizes the most recently available data14 for the service area and, if applicable, special populations and addresses the following:
Factors associated with access to care and health care utilization (for example, geography, transportation, occupation, transience, unemployment, income level, educational attainment); :unselected: The most significant causes of morbidity and mortality (for example, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, low birth weight, behavioral health) as well as any associated health disparities; and :unselected: Any other unique health care needs or characteristics that impact health status or access to, or utilization of, primary care (for example, social factors, the physical environment, cultural/ethnic factors, language needs, housing status).
Section of the Application to review Project Narrative - Need section, items 2a - c
Items 2a - c within the Application
Describe your process for assessing the needs of the service area/target population, including:
a) How often you conduct or update the needs assessment.
13 Compliance may be demonstrated based on the information included in a Service Area Competition (SAC) or a Renewal of Designation (RD) application. Note that in the case of a Notice of Funding Opportunity for a New Access Point or Expanded Services grant, HRSA may specify application-specific requirements for demonstrating an applicant has consulted with the appropriate agencies and providers consistent with Section 330(k)(2)(D) of the Public Health Service Act. Such application-specific requirements may require a completed or updated needs assessment more recent than that which was provided in an applicant's SAC or RD application. 14 In cases where data are not available for the specific service area or special population, health centers may use extrapolation techniques to make valid estimates using data available for related areas and population groups. Extrapolation is the process of using data that describes one population to estimate data for a comparable population, based on one or more common differentiating demographic characteristics. Where data are not directly available and extrapolation is not feasible, health centers should use the best available data describing the area or population to be served.
27 :unselected:
SAC AND RD PAR GUIDING PRINCIPLES - FISCAL YEAR 2020
Competing Continuation and Renewal of Designation Application Review SOP
b) How you use the results to inform and improve service delivery.
c) Using the most recently available data (cite data sources where applicable), for the service area and, if applicable, for each special population (MHC, HCH, PHPC) identified in the SAAT, address the following:
. Factors associated with access to care and health care utilization (e.g., geography, transportation, occupation, transience, unemployment, income level, educational attainment).
. Most significant causes of morbidity and mortality (e.g., diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, low birth weight, substance use disorder) as well as any associated health disparities.
. Any other unique health care needs or characteristics that impact health status or access to, or utilization of, primary care (e.g., social risk factors, the physical environment, cultural/ethnic factors, language needs, housing status).
